# brainfuck-interpreter-gui

## A Brainfuck Text Editor, Interpreter, and Turing Machine Simulator

An integrated development environment for the esolang brainfuck. It includes a text editor with syntax highlighting, an interpreter, debugging with breakpoints/stepping, and turing machine simulator.

This project is in fulfillment of the [CPSC 312 2024W1 project requirements](https://steven-wolfman.github.io/cpsc-312-website-2024W1/project.html).

## Team Members

Our team is:

+ Yod Golshani (80626666): `yod`
+ Auden Hafezi (96479712): `audenh`
+ Benjamin McPhee (16096588): `bmcphee`
+ Kevin Liu (87079844): `kliu52`
+ Shreyan Das (51692796): `dshreyan`

We call ourselves: `hooglers`

## Acknowledgments

We surely built on the work of others! Here are resources and people we got support from:

+ [Codeblocks from the Brainfuck Wikipedia page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brainfuck) for tests and language understanding.
+ [kavehmz/brainfuck_examples](https://github.com/kavehmz/brainfuck_examples/tree/master) for tests.
+ [haskell-gi](https://github.com/haskell-gi) for a GUI. (well, bindings to a gui library more specifically)
+ [Parsec](https://github.com/haskell/parsec) for a full-featured parsing library.

## Product Pitch

Our full project idea is a complete integrated development environment (IDE) for brainfuck. Its features would include (but perhaps would not be limited to):

+ **A Fully-Featured Text Editor** with syntax highlighting, automatic code completion, and error detection.
+ **A Realtime Interpreter** written entirely in haskell, including tokenisation, built with Parsec.
+ **A Turing Machine Simulator** allowing for a visual representation of the memory tape for further understanding about turing machine behaviour (Could be very nice to have when taking CPSC 121).
+ **A Debugger** that allows for stepping through the brainfuck code, setting breakpoints, and stepping in/out of loops (with insparation from the CPSC 213 machine).
+ **Variable Compilation Speed** to aid with turing machine understanding.
+ **A Higher level Turing Lang** that seamlessly compiles down to Brainfuck, saving turing machine enthusasts from needing to trudge through raw brainfuck.
+ **A Beautiful and Themeable GUI** using GNOME's GTK library for access to the wide range of extensions and themes it provides.
+ **Highly Extensible**, with an extension system written in (of course) Haskell.
+ **Multithreading!!** Because, uh... It's really funny to have multithreaded brainfuck. You know, because that's what's holding it back. It'd beat C if it was multithreaded.
+ **Fully Free and Open Source** with the GNU GPL v3 License.
+ **It's Brainfuck!!!!** Need we say more?

This builds on our haskell knowledge by looking into parsing using parsec, a parsing library, to identify matching brackets and parsing brainfuck code into tokens. Then, syntactic analysis is used for both syntax highlighting, making it so that different tokens are different colours and checking for syntax errors. Furthermore, we are extending our knowledge by making graphical user interfaces using the GI.Gtk library.

## Minimal Viable Project

Our intended minimum viable product contains the following core functionalities:

+ **A Text editor** with syntax highlighting and mismatched bracket detection.
+ **A Realtime Interpreter** written entirely in haskell, including tokenisation, built with Parsec.
+ **A Turing Machine Simulator** allowing for a visual representation of the memory tape for further understanding about turing machine behaviour (Could be very nice to have when taking CPSC 121).
+ **A Stepper** to allow for intimate understading of what's happening to the tape at every moment (similar in style to DrRacket's implementation).
+ **A Beautiful and Themeable GUI** using GNOME's GTK library for access to the wide range of extensions and themes it provides.
+ **Fully Free and Open Source** with the GNU GPL v3 License.
+ **Surprisingly, Still Brainfuck** and not another word need be said ✨

Our project builds on the strengths of Haskell by leveraging pattern matching to match lexical tokens generated by the parser. Haskell also has excellent type safety and inference, making it near impossible to mix up different tokens with one another, unlike in a weakly typed language like TypeScript. Also, the executables created by Haskell are performant, making the final product fast.

## Proof of Concept

For a proof-of-concept, we have brought forth two aspects of this IDE that, together, very clearly act as a foundation for and act to demonstrate the feasibility of the final project. Those being:

&nbsp;&nbsp;**The Interpreter**, which has the ability to take in Brainfuck code, either as a `.bf` file or as a directly entered string and execute it exactly indentically to the Brainfuck specification&mdash;outputting to the tty. It includes a `Tape` datatype that acts identically to an actual turing machine's infinite tape and O(1) complexity for every action save for reading the input. This same datatype will be used for tape visualisation in the final product.

&nbsp;&nbsp;**The Graphical User Interface** which consists of two windows, one for brainfuck text entry and an output panel for the brainfuck compilation&mdash;when hooked into the interpreter. It also has a `Run` and `Reset` button for starting and resetting the brainfuck code. Currently, the shape of the GUI does exist, along with GTK themeing (as in if you have a gtk theme on your system it will follow it).

### Code!&nbsp;

The comments were pruned (go look at the actual files they're super understandable and documented well :)

#### Tape Implementation:&nbsp;

```haskell
data Tape a = Tape [a] a [a]
    deriving (Show)

shiftRight :: (Bounded a) => Tape a -> Tape a
shiftRight (Tape prev i []) = Tape (i:prev) minBound (repeat minBound)
shiftRight (Tape prev i (a:as)) = Tape (i:prev) a as

shiftLeft :: Bounded a => Tape a -> Tape a
shiftLeft (Tape [] i suc) = Tape (repeat minBound) minBound (i:suc)
shiftLeft (Tape (a:as) i suc) = Tape as a (i:suc)

inc :: (Eq a, Bounded a, Enum a) => Tape a -> Tape a
inc (Tape prev i suc)
  | i == maxBound = Tape prev minBound suc
  | otherwise = Tape prev (succ i) suc

dec :: (Eq a, Bounded a, Enum a) => Tape a -> Tape a
dec (Tape prev i suc)
  | i == minBound = Tape prev maxBound suc
  | otherwise = Tape prev (pred i) suc

store :: a -> Tape a -> Tape a
store x (Tape prev _ suc) = Tape prev x suc

index :: Tape a -> a
index (Tape _ i _) = i
```

#### Main Brainfuck Parsing Functions:&nbsp;

```haskell
buildBracketMap :: String -> Maybe (Map Int Int)
buildBracketMap s = buildMap s 0 [] empty
  where
    buildMap [] _ [] k = Just k
    buildMap [] _ _ _ = Nothing
    buildMap (x:xs) i stack k
      | x == '[' = buildInc (i:stack) k
      | x == ']' = case stack of
          [] -> Nothing
          (p:ps) -> buildInc ps (insert p i $ insert i p k)
      | otherwise = buildInc stack k
      where buildInc = buildMap xs (i + 1)

parseString :: Maybe (Map Int Int) -> Tape Word8 -> String -> IO (Tape Word8)
parseString Nothing _ _ = error "mismatched braces"
parseString (Just m) tape s = parseChars 0 tape
  where
    parseChars i t
      | i >= length s = return t
      | otherwise = case s !! i of
          '.' -> writeInputFromTape t >>= parseInc
          ',' -> writeInputToTape t >>= parseInc
          '<' -> parseInc (shiftLeft t)
          '>' -> parseInc (shiftRight t)
          '+' -> parseInc (inc t)
          '-' -> parseInc (dec t)
          '[' | index t == 0 -> jump
              | otherwise    -> parseInc t
          ']' | index t /= 0 -> jump
              | otherwise    -> parseInc t
          _   -> parseInc t
      where
        parseInc = parseChars (i + 1)
        jump = case Data.Map.lookup i m of
                Just j  -> parseChars (j + 1) t
                Nothing -> error "mismatched braces"
```

#### Adding all GUI elements to window:&nbsp;

```haskell
  hbox <- new Gtk.Box [#orientation := Gtk.OrientationHorizontal]
  vbox <- new Gtk.Box [#orientation := Gtk.OrientationVertical]
  buttonBox <- new Gtk.Box [#orientation := Gtk.OrientationHorizontal]
  #packStart hbox scrolledWindowEntry True True 32
  #packStart vbox scrolledWindowOutput True True 32
  #packStart buttonBox lockedButton False False 16
  #packStart buttonBox lockedResetButton False False 16
  #packStart vbox buttonBox True True 32
  #packStart hbox vbox True True 32
```

#### Invoking the GUI:&nbsp;

```haskell
run :: IO ()
run = do
  maybeApp <- Gtk.applicationNew (Just "foss.brainfuck-ide") []

  case maybeApp of
    Nothing -> putStrLn "Failed to create the GTK application."
    Just app -> do
      on app #activate (activate app)
      void $ #run app Nothing
```

#### Main.hs's logic:&nbsp;

```haskell
handleArgs :: [String] -> IO ()
handleArgs ("-f":f:_) = void (readFile f >>= Lib.run)
handleArgs ("-s":s:_) = void $ Lib.run s
handleArgs ("-g":_)   = GUITest.run
handleArgs _ = error "missing or invalid args"

main:: IO()
main = getArgs >>= handleArgs
```

## How to test and run the code

**Ensure you have the [nix package manager](https://nixos.org/download/) installed or the code will not compile!**

To test the interpreter functionality, simply run `make` from the root directory or `make test` from `./haskell`. Technically you could run this through ghci, but it returns a `tape`, which is an infinite piece of data so you probably don't want to `show` that.

To use the interpreter, simply run the command `stack exec brainfuck-interpreter-gui-exe -- -f <<PATH TO FILE>>` (without the `<<>>`) to open a `.bf` file or `stack exec brainfuck-interpreter-gui-exe -- -s STRING` to directly interpret a brainfuck string.

To run the GUI, enter `./haskell` and run the command `stack exec brainfuck-interpreter-gui-exe -- -g` or run the command `make gui`. You can also run `stack ghci`/`make ghci`, then run `:l GUITest` followed by `run`.

Just a note: the tests using `Tasty` were removed in favour of an in-house tester written in POSIX shell script because the interpreter prints to the tty and tasty does not have a way to read from the tty without being extremely inconsistent. The equivalent `Tasty` tests do still exist and can be run with `stack test` but will undoubtably fail.

### Dependencies

|Haskell Libraries|Packages (via Nix)|
|-|-|
|as|as|
|base|glib|
|binary|gobject-introspection|
|containers|pcre2|
|silently|freetype|
|gi-gtk|cairo|
|freetype2|expat|
|cairo|fontconfig|
|haskell-gi-base|util-linux|
|text|harfbuzz|
|tasty|libselinux|
|tasty-hunit|libsepol|
||pkg-config|
||xorg.libXdmcp|
||gtk3|
||lerc|
||libthai|
||libdatrie|
||libxkbcommon|
||libepoxy|
||xorg.libXtst|

## License

This project is licensed under the [GNU General Public License v3.0](./LICENSE).
